RFC: Language specification for the Nimbus Feature Manifest (#156)
mozilla/experimenter-docs: docs/fml-spec.md

> # The Feature Manifest Language

Reviewer: Should we have a section that talks about Desktop and plans with that - maybe a link to https://experimenter.info/desktop-feature-api/#registering-a-new-feature?

## About this document

This document is the specfiication for the Feature Manifest Language for use with the Nimbus SDK.

Language features that have not yet been implemented are marked as so.

## Introduction

> Nimbus is an experimentation platform to allow product owners to easily run experiments on their mobile apps.

Reviewer 2: just mobile? :P

Author: I'd be very happy if this was expanded to non-mobile platforms!

The [Feature API][feature-api] allows application developers to query Nimbus for JSON objects which they could use to configure the app's features.

The Feature Manifest is a significant evolution of the Feature API: by generating Kotlin and Swift code, it adds type-safety, schema checking and defaulting to the Feature API.

## High level concepts

To the product owner, Nimbus allows you to experiment with different configurations of the application.

> It does this by exposing a small proportion of the audience to different configurations of a feature. Once a winning configuration is identified, it can be rolled out to the rest of the audience, all without a re-release of the app.

Reviewer 3: nit: The proportion doesn't _have_ to be small, that depends on the population-sizing needed to get a statistically significant result. I suggest a slight rewording for the sake of accuracy:

```suggestion
It does this by exposing a pre-determined proportion of the audience to different configurations of a feature. Once a winning configuration is identified, it can be rolled out to the rest of the audience, all without a re-release of the app.
```

> To the app developer, **Nimbus is a configuration store**. Features are configured using data from Nimbus. Nimbus is updated at startup of each run.

Reviewer 3: > Nimbus is updated at startup of each run.

This statement is hiding a bit of complexity here. Would it be worth linking to existing documentation or clarifying the difference between "updating" and "applying" here?

Author: I'm trying to keep the scope of this document to "the FML language spec". I deliberately don't go into much detail apart from that.

e.g. installing, running configuring the FML.

For each feature, the feature manifest should define a complete configuration needed by the app, including a default value for every variable.

Remotely set experiments and rollouts will vary the configurations by presenting _patches_ on that configuration. If the complete configuration of the feature can be
represented by a JSON object, then patches to that configuration would be applied in a manner consistent with [JSON Merge Patch RFC 7396][json-merge-patch].

[json-merge-patch]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7396

### About the generated code

Each project has its own manifest file, containing all the features configured in that project.

Running `nimbus-fml` for a manifest generates a Swift or Kotlin class, which is named as a commmand line argument.

In the examples, this class is called `FxNimbus`, but this is project specific. This is the entry point to getting values out of Nimbus.

The generated class must be connected to the Nimbus SDK, which downloads the experiment recipes and decides which experiments this user is in.

```swift
// Initialize the Nimbus SDK
let nimbus = createNimbusForApplication()
// Connect the generated code to the Nimbus SDK

> FxNimbus.api = nimbus

Author: The `FxNimbus` class is a holder for the `FxNimbus.Features` class, which provides access to the `data class`es.

The code called when calling `FxNimbus.features.myFeature.value()` is to call into the rust API (perhaps it should be called `sdk`?) to grab a JSON object, then give that to the feature's data class, which acts as a facade onto the JSON object.

```

Feature configuration for a feature individual features are accessed through the `FxNimbus.features` property. For example, a `newtab` feature's configuration can be accessed thus:

```swift
let newTabConfig = FxNimbus.features.newtab.value()
```

You should record when the user has been exposed to the feature or exposed to where the feature would've been.

```swift
FxNimbus.features.newtab.recordExposure()
```

### Identifier cases

All the examples below use `kebab-case` for identifiers. When these identifiers are used to generate code, they are transformed to the language-specific casing. For example, a feature is specified in the FML as being called `spotlight-search`, but would be referred to in Swift as `spotlightSearch`.

## Introducing the FML

> The [Feature Manifest Language is a dialect of YAML][fml-is-yaml]. The manifest file, say `nimbus.fml.yaml` must be valid YAML.

Reviewer: It might be useful to see a complete yaml schema for the FML, that includes all possible fields and their types (I'm not sure how yaml schemas work, or if there is a standard for that, but I feel like it might make it easier to see the whole FML as one)

Reviewer 3: Here's an example of a yaml-schema in Glean (which defines the schema for the metrics.yaml file): https://github.com/mozilla/glean_parser/blob/main/glean_parser/schemas/metrics.2-0-0.schema.yaml

[fml-is-yaml]: fml-front-end-format.md

At a minimum the `nimbus.fml.yaml` file defines a map of features.

```yaml
# A YAML file to define Nimbus features.
# This file has zero features.
features: {}
```

This `features` property is a mapping of feature-id to feature. Feature IDs need to be valid strings. In this document all feature IDs are `kebab-cased` in the manifest.

They are converted to `mixedCamelCase` in both Kotlin and Swift.

### Features have `variables`

We start with an example which configures the integration between Firefox for iOS and iOS Spotlight feature.

Here, we define a feature with an id of `spotlight-search`, with two variables— `enabled` and `max-age-in-days`

```yaml
features:
  spotlight-search:
    description: Configuring how we integrate web-pages with iOS's Spotlight search
    variables:
      enabled:
        description: If `false`, the app will not record anything with Spotlight.
        type: Bool
        default: false
      max-age-in-days:
        description: The number of days a single piece of content is indexed for.
        type: Double
        default: 28.0
```

Each variable has a `description`, a `type` and `default` value.

> The `description` is copied verbatim into the generated code as comments. This will be visible in Xcode and Android Studio when navigating code or code completions.

Reviewer: I love this!!!

> The `type` is the type name or type label that the variable will be. The type labels for variables will be familiar to developers who have written Kotlin, Swift or Typescript.

Author: Linked to this answer in the document.

> The `default` value is used when the variable is not set remotely, or there is a problem within the SDK. The default value has to make sense in the context of the variable's type.

Author: Corrected copy to clarify.

```swift
let spotlightConfig = FxNimbus.features.spotlightSearch.value()
guard spotlightConfig.enabled else {
    return
}

// let item = CSSearchableItem(…)

let oneDayInSeconds: TimeInterval = 24 * 60 * 60
let maxAgeInSeconds = spotlightConfig.maxAgeInDays * oneDayInSeconds
item.expirationDate = Date(timeIntervalSinceNow: maxAgeInSeconds)
```

> Notice that:

Reviewer: super nit: We can probably remove the "Notice that"

The `defaults` list is a list of zero or more "default blocks", used to patch the default values of the variables in a feature.

The `value` property defines the patch which is overlaid on top of the existing variable values.

```yaml
features:
  spotlight-search:
    variables:
      enabled:
        description: If `false`, the app will not record anything with Spotlight.
        type: Bool
        default: false
      max-age-in-days:
        description: The number of days a single piece of content is indexed for.
        type: Double
        default: 28.0
      item-thumbnail:
        description: "The icon that appears in the Spotlight search results.
          Note that changing this does not change already indexed content."
        type: ThumbnailType
        default: letter
    defaults:
      - value: { item-thumbnail: screenshot, max-age-in-days: 56.0 }
```

The `defaults` list of `value`s set the default value of `item-thumbnail` to `screenshot`, and `max-age-in-days` to `56.0`.

Adding new feature blocks to the `defaults` list patches the existing defaults further:

```yaml
    defaults:

>       - value: { item-thumbnail: screenshot, max-age-in-days: 56.0 }

Reviewer 4: q: What is the advantage of keeping the previous default patch? Is it to understand all previously made change when reviewing this? Would it make sense to add a timestamp or versioning to these patches?

Author: I think there's a documentary reason (as you've alluded to), but also a speed/accuracy reason: if we wish to make a specific change permanent, then we can copy it exactly in to the manifest, and then let FML sort it out. 

Additionally:

We have talked about tooling to compact/rationalize these patches (i.e. read the manifest, the re-write it after merging these patches).

We have also talked about tooling to download the experiment recipes, then write the rollouts right in to the manifest.

      - value: { max-age-in-days: 64.0 }
```

In this case, the default value for `item-thumbnail` is now `screenshot`, and `max-age-in-days` is `64.0`.

### Feature defaults and channels

For release engineering reasons, or marketing reasons, we might want to ensure that the feature isn't enabled by default for the release population of users.

> However, for quality reasons, we might want a different configuration for our nightly audience.

Reviewer 2: This explanation around "engineering/marking/quality" is a little weird – I would frame this more as something like 

"Sometimes it is useful to have different default configuration for different *channels* of an application. For example, you may want to have a feature available for testing on Nightly or Beta before turning it on in Release".

Author: Nice!

This is achieved by using channels.

```yaml
channels:
  - nightly
  - beta
  - release
features:
  spotlight-search:
    variables:
      enabled:
        description: "…"
        type: Bool
        default: false
    defaults:

>       - channel: nightly

Reviewer 4: 🎉

        value: { enabled: true }
```

The `channel` property specifies which build flavour the default applies. In this example, the `nightly` version of the app set the `enabled` variable to `true`; all other versions of the app have `enabled` as `false`.

In this way, app developers can use the feature manifest as a replacement for other more adhoc feature flag solutions.

> ### Feature defaults and runtime targeting

Reviewer 2: I think you should leave anything that is unimplemented out and put it in a separate proposal to avoid confusion about the current state of what's being implemented.

Also, I think it would be line up with a use case that needs to use it (search or pocket come to mind, particularly around geos) to ensure it's meeting their needs.

Author: I've filtered those out into a separate file.

> ⚠️ Unimplemented. This is intended to use the same JEXL targeting used elsewhere in Nimbus SDK.

Occassionally, we would like to vary a configuration based upon the device. In this example, the `homepage` feature has sections for both Pocket and Topsites.

```yaml
features:
  homepage:
    variables:
      pocket-enabled:
        description: If true, show stories from Pocket. This is only available in certain territories.
        type: Bool
        default: false
      topsites-enabled:
        description: If true, show tiles from the users most recent and frequently visited pages.
        type: Bool
        default: false
    defaults:
      - channel: nightly
        value: { topsites-enabled: true }
      - channel: nightly
        targeting: locale in ['en-US', 'de-DE', 'en-GB']
        value: { pocket-enabled: true }
```

In this example, `pocket-enabled` defaults to `true` only on the `nightly` channel and when the device locale is in `US`, `DE` or `GB`.

## Additional types

### Primitive types

Primitive types supported:

 * `String`
 * `Boolean` or `Bool`. Both Kotlin and Swift's spelling is supported.
 * `Int`

> > ⚠️ Unimplemented

Reviewer: nit: Should this be under "Double", just to be consistent with where the other "Unimplemented" were placed

 * `Text` performs a lookup for displayable text in the application bundle. If not text exists, returns the string used for lookup.
 * `Image` performs a lookup for an image in the application bundle.

For each of these types, the default value *must* correspond to a valid resource identifier in the app.

```yaml
features:
    upgrade-message:
        description: A message displayed when the user upgrades
        variables:
            hero-image:
                description: A pre-bundled image
                type: Image
                default: ic_fox
                suggested:
                  ic_fox: A picture of a cute fox
                  ic_snow_fox: A picture of a cute snow fox
                  ic_redpanda: A picture of a cute red panda
            message-content:
                description: Text content to show the user
                default: msg_thankyou
                suggested:
                  msg_welldone: A nice well done for upgrading
                  msg_thankyou: A nice thank you for sticking with us
                  msg_warning: A warning that bad things happen to good people
```

### Object types

> Some features require more organization. In the case, JSON Objects can be coerced into generated data classes.

Reviewer 2: Is the idea here that you will assume that you have defined `DialogButton somewhere in the application?
How do you distinguish misspelled built-in supported types and custom types?

Also, how does experimenter pick up what to do here?

Author: * Experimenter doesn't know how to support these sorts of types. Yet.
* How do you distinguish misspelled built-in supported types and custom types? — it's a good question. For Kotlin, there's package names, but more likely is that you wouldn't call them that. Changed the names in the PR.

        default: {}
      negative-button:
        type: DialogButton
        default:
          text-color: white
          background-color: red
types:
  DialogButton:
    description: A button used in dialogs throughout the app
    fields:
      text-color:
        description: The color of the text
        type: String
        default: black
      background-color:
        description: The background color
        type: String
        default: gray
```

The JSON to recreate the defaults for the feature above would be:

```json
{
  "positive-button": {
    "text-color": "blue",
    "background-color": "white"
  },
  "neutral-button": {
    "text-color": "black",
    "background-color": "gray"
  },
  "negative-button": {
    "text-color": "red",
    "background-color": "white"
  }
}
```

### Structural types

Generic types aren't supported, but in the following section, `T` can be any other type supported by the FML, including structural types.

 * `Option<T>` or `T?`
 * `List<T>` or `[T]` - lists of type `T`. Lists are encoded with JSON arrays.
    Lists are not merged, so are less useful than you might think.
 * `Map<K, V>` or `[K: V]` — maps with key type `K` to `V`.

> Maps are transported as JSON objects, which restrict the types of the keys to types that can be coerced from `String`s. Additionally, JSON values that cannot be coerced to the value type of the map are discared.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Maps are transported as JSON objects, which restrict the types of the keys to types that can be coerced from `String`s. Additionally, JSON values that cannot be coerced to the value type of the map are discarded.
```
